README.md, before:

# Zen MCP: Many Workflows. One Context.

[zen_web.webm](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/851e3911-7f06-47c0-a4ab-a2601236697c)

<div align="center">
  <b>🤖 <a href="https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code">Claude Code</a> OR <a href="https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli">Gemini CLI</a> + [Gemini / OpenAI / Grok / OpenRouter / DIAL / Ollama / Anthropic / Any Model] = Your Ultimate AI Development Team</b>
</div>

<br/>

**AI orchestration for Claude Code** - A Model Context Protocol server that gives your CLI of choice (e.g. [Claude Code](https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code)) access to multiple AI models for enhanced code analysis, problem-solving, and collaborative development.

**True AI collaboration with conversation continuity** - Claude stays in control but gets perspectives from the best AI for each subtask. Context carries forward seamlessly across tools and models, enabling complex workflows like: code reviews with multiple models → automated planning → implementation → pre-commit validation.

> **You're in control.** Claude orchestrates the AI team, but you decide the workflow. Craft powerful prompts that bring in Gemini Pro, GPT 5, Flash, or local offline models exactly when needed.

<details>
<summary><b>Reasons to Use Zen MCP</b></summary>

1. **Multi-Model Orchestration** - Claude coordinates with Gemini Pro, O3, GPT-5, and 50+ other models to get the best analysis for each task

2. **Context Revival Magic** - Even after Claude's context resets, continue conversations seamlessly by having other models "remind" Claude of the discussion

3. **Guided Workflows** - Enforces systematic investigation phases that prevent rushed analysis and ensure thorough code examination

4. **Extended Context Windows** - Break Claude's limits by delegating to Gemini (1M tokens) or O3 (200K tokens) for massive codebases

5. **True Conversation Continuity** - Full context flows across tools and models - Gemini remembers what O3 said 10 steps ago

6. **Model-Specific Strengths** - Extended thinking with Gemini Pro, blazing speed with Flash, strong reasoning with O3, privacy with local Ollama

7. **Professional Code Reviews** - Multi-pass analysis with severity levels, actionable feedback, and consensus from multiple AI experts

8. **Smart Debugging Assistant** - Systematic root cause analysis with hypothesis tracking and confidence levels

9. **Automatic Model Selection** - Claude intelligently picks the right model for each subtask (or you can specify)

10. **Vision Capabilities** - Analyze screenshots, diagrams, and visual content with vision-enabled models

11. **Local Model Support** - Run Llama, Mistral, or other models locally for complete privacy and zero API costs

12. **Bypass MCP Token Limits** - Automatically works around MCP's 25K limit for large prompts and responses

**The Killer Feature:** When Claude's context resets, just ask to "continue with O3" - the other model's response magically revives Claude's understanding without re-ingesting documents!

#### Example: Multi-Model Code Review Workflow

1. `Perform a codereview using gemini pro and o3 and use planner to generate a detailed plan, implement the fixes and do a final precommit check by continuing from the previous codereview`
2. This triggers a [`codereview`](docs/tools/codereview.md) workflow where Claude walks the code, looking for all kinds of issues
3. After multiple passes, collects relevant code and makes note of issues along the way
4. Maintains a `confidence` level between `exploring`, `low`, `medium`, `high` and `certain` to track how confidently it's been able to find and identify issues
5. Generates a detailed list of critical -> low issues
6. Shares the relevant files, findings, etc with **Gemini Pro** to perform a deep dive for a second [`codereview`](docs/tools/codereview.md)
7. Comes back with a response and next does the same with o3, adding to the prompt if a new discovery comes to light
8. When done, Claude takes in all the feedback and combines a single list of all critical -> low issues, including good patterns in your code. The final list includes new findings or revisions in case Claude misunderstood or missed something crucial and one of the other models pointed this out
9. It then uses the [`planner`](docs/tools/planner.md) workflow to break the work down into simpler steps if a major refactor is required
10. Claude then performs the actual work of fixing highlighted issues
11. When done, Claude returns to Gemini Pro for a [`precommit`](docs/tools/precommit.md) review

All within a single conversation thread! Gemini Pro in step 11 _knows_ what was recommended by O3 in step 7! Taking that context
and review into consideration to aid with its final pre-commit review.

**Think of it as Claude Code _for_ Claude Code.** This MCP isn't magic. It's just **super-glue**.

> **Remember:** Claude stays in full control — but **YOU** call the shots.
> Zen is designed to have Claude engage other models only when needed — and to follow through with meaningful back-and-forth.
> **You're** the one who crafts the powerful prompt that makes Claude bring in Gemini, Flash, O3 — or fly solo.
> You're the guide. The prompter. The puppeteer.
> #### You are the AI - **Actually Intelligent**.

#### Recommended AI Stack

For best results, use Claude Code with:
- **Opus 4.1** - All agentic work and orchestration
- **Gemini 2.5 Pro** - Deep thinking, code reviews, debugging, pre-commit analysis

</details>

## Quick Start (5 minutes)

**Prerequisites:** Python 3.10+, Git, [uv installed](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/)

**1. Get API Keys** (choose one or more):
- **[OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/)** - Access multiple models with one API
- **[Gemini](https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey)** - Google's latest models
- **[OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys)** - O3, GPT-5 series
- **[X.AI](https://console.x.ai/)** - Grok models
- **[DIAL](https://dialx.ai/)** - Vendor-agnostic model access
- **[Ollama](https://ollama.ai/)** - Local models (free)

**2. Install** (choose one):

**Option A: Instant Setup with uvx** (recommended)
```json
// Add to ~/.claude/settings.json or .mcp.json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zen": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["--from", "git+https://github.com/BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server.git", "zen-mcp-server"],
      "env": {
        "PATH": "/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/opt/homebrew/bin:~/.local/bin",
        "GEMINI_API_KEY": "your-key-here"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Option B: Clone and Setup**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server.git
cd zen-mcp-server
./run-server.sh  # Handles everything: setup, config, API keys
```

**3. Start Using!**
```
"Use zen to analyze this code for security issues with gemini pro"
"Debug this error with o3 and then get flash to suggest optimizations"
"Plan the migration strategy with zen, get consensus from multiple models"
```

👉 **[Complete Setup Guide](docs/getting-started.md)** with detailed installation, configuration, and troubleshooting

## Core Tools

**Collaboration & Planning**
- **[`chat`](docs/tools/chat.md)** - Brainstorm ideas, get second opinions, validate approaches
- **[`thinkdeep`](docs/tools/thinkdeep.md)** - Extended reasoning, edge case analysis, alternative perspectives
- **[`planner`](docs/tools/planner.md)** - Break down complex projects into structured, actionable plans
- **[`consensus`](docs/tools/consensus.md)** - Get expert opinions from multiple AI models with stance steering

**Code Analysis & Quality**
- **[`analyze`](docs/tools/analyze.md)** - Understand architecture, patterns, dependencies across entire codebases
- **[`codereview`](docs/tools/codereview.md)** - Professional reviews with severity levels and actionable feedback
- **[`debug`](docs/tools/debug.md)** - Systematic investigation and root cause analysis
- **[`precommit`](docs/tools/precommit.md)** - Validate changes before committing, prevent regressions

**Development Tools**
- **[`refactor`](docs/tools/refactor.md)** - Intelligent code refactoring with decomposition focus
- **[`testgen`](docs/tools/testgen.md)** - Comprehensive test generation with edge cases
- **[`secaudit`](docs/tools/secaudit.md)** - Security audits with OWASP Top 10 analysis
- **[`docgen`](docs/tools/docgen.md)** - Generate documentation with complexity analysis

**Utilities**
- **[`challenge`](docs/tools/challenge.md)** - Prevent "You're absolutely right!" responses with critical analysis
- **[`tracer`](docs/tools/tracer.md)** - Static analysis prompts for call-flow mapping

👉 **[Complete Tools Reference](docs/tools/)** with examples, parameters, and workflows

## Key Features

**AI Orchestration**
- **Auto model selection** - Claude picks the right AI for each task
- **Multi-model workflows** - Chain different models in single conversations
- **Conversation continuity** - Context preserved across tools and models
- **[Context revival](docs/context-revival.md)** - Continue conversations even after context resets

**Model Support**
- **Multiple providers** - Gemini, OpenAI, X.AI, OpenRouter, DIAL, Ollama
- **Latest models** - GPT-5, Gemini 2.5 Pro, O3, Grok-4, local Llama
- **[Thinking modes](docs/advanced-usage.md#thinking-modes)** - Control reasoning depth vs cost
- **Vision support** - Analyze images, diagrams, screenshots

**Developer Experience**
- **Guided workflows** - Systematic investigation prevents rushed analysis
- **Smart file handling** - Auto-expand directories, manage token limits
- **Web search integration** - Access current documentation and best practices
- **[Large prompt support](docs/advanced-usage.md#working-with-large-prompts)** - Bypass MCP's 25K token limit

## Example Workflows

**Multi-model Code Review:**
```
"Perform a codereview using gemini pro and o3, then use planner to create a fix strategy"
```
→ Claude reviews code systematically → Consults Gemini Pro → Gets O3's perspective → Creates unified action plan

**Collaborative Debugging:**
```
"Debug this race condition with max thinking mode, then validate the fix with precommit"
```
→ Deep investigation → Expert analysis → Solution implementation → Pre-commit validation

**Architecture Planning:**
```
"Plan our microservices migration, get consensus from pro and o3 on the approach"
```
→ Structured planning → Multiple expert opinions → Consensus building → Implementation roadmap

👉 **[Advanced Usage Guide](docs/advanced-usage.md)** for complex workflows, model configuration, and power-user features

## Quick Links

**📖 Documentation**
- [Getting Started](docs/getting-started.md) - Complete setup guide
- [Tools Reference](docs/tools/) - All tools with examples
- [Advanced Usage](docs/advanced-usage.md) - Power user features
- [Configuration](docs/configuration.md) - Environment variables, restrictions

**🔧 Setup & Support**
- [WSL Setup](docs/wsl-setup.md) - Windows users
- [Troubleshooting](docs/troubleshooting.md) - Common issues
- [Contributing](docs/contributions.md) - Code standards, PR process

## License

Apache 2.0 License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

Built with the power of **Multi-Model AI** collaboration 🤝
- **A**ctual **I**ntelligence by real Humans
- [MCP (Model Context Protocol)](https://modelcontextprotocol.com) by Anthropic
- [Claude Code](https://claude.ai/code) - Your AI coding orchestrator
- [Gemini 2.5 Pro & Flash](https://ai.google.dev/) - Extended thinking & fast analysis
- [OpenAI O3 & GPT-5](https://openai.com/) - Strong reasoning & latest capabilities

### Star History

[![Star History Chart](https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server&type=Date)](https://www.star-history.com/#BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server&Date)

Commit message:

feat(auth): add ChatGPT login mode for OpenAI authentication
Add support for using ChatGPT Pro subscription tokens as an alternative
to OpenAI API keys. When OPENAI_CHATGPT_LOGIN_MODE=true, the server
prioritizes tokens from ~/.codex/auth.json over OPENAI_API_KEY.

Features:
- Priority authentication: ChatGPT tokens > API key > disabled
- ChatGPT backend API integration with required headers
- Comprehensive test coverage (34 tests)
- Fallback to standard API when mode disabled or tokens unavailable
- Documentation updates in README and .env.example

This allows ChatGPT Pro users to leverage their existing subscription
instead of purchasing separate OpenAI API credits.

README.md, after:

# Zen MCP: Many Workflows. One Context.

[zen_web.webm](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/851e3911-7f06-47c0-a4ab-a2601236697c)

<div align="center">
  <b>🤖 <a href="https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code">Claude Code</a> OR <a href="https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli">Gemini CLI</a> + [Gemini / OpenAI / Grok / OpenRouter / DIAL / Ollama / Anthropic / Any Model] = Your Ultimate AI Development Team</b>
</div>

<br/>

**AI orchestration for Claude Code** - A Model Context Protocol server that gives your CLI of choice (e.g. [Claude Code](https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code)) access to multiple AI models for enhanced code analysis, problem-solving, and collaborative development.

**True AI collaboration with conversation continuity** - Claude stays in control but gets perspectives from the best AI for each subtask. Context carries forward seamlessly across tools and models, enabling complex workflows like: code reviews with multiple models → automated planning → implementation → pre-commit validation.

> **You're in control.** Claude orchestrates the AI team, but you decide the workflow. Craft powerful prompts that bring in Gemini Pro, GPT 5, Flash, or local offline models exactly when needed.

<details>
<summary><b>Reasons to Use Zen MCP</b></summary>

1. **Multi-Model Orchestration** - Claude coordinates with Gemini Pro, O3, GPT-5, and 50+ other models to get the best analysis for each task

2. **Context Revival Magic** - Even after Claude's context resets, continue conversations seamlessly by having other models "remind" Claude of the discussion

3. **Guided Workflows** - Enforces systematic investigation phases that prevent rushed analysis and ensure thorough code examination

4. **Extended Context Windows** - Break Claude's limits by delegating to Gemini (1M tokens) or O3 (200K tokens) for massive codebases

5. **True Conversation Continuity** - Full context flows across tools and models - Gemini remembers what O3 said 10 steps ago

6. **Model-Specific Strengths** - Extended thinking with Gemini Pro, blazing speed with Flash, strong reasoning with O3, privacy with local Ollama

7. **Professional Code Reviews** - Multi-pass analysis with severity levels, actionable feedback, and consensus from multiple AI experts

8. **Smart Debugging Assistant** - Systematic root cause analysis with hypothesis tracking and confidence levels

9. **Automatic Model Selection** - Claude intelligently picks the right model for each subtask (or you can specify)

10. **Vision Capabilities** - Analyze screenshots, diagrams, and visual content with vision-enabled models

11. **Local Model Support** - Run Llama, Mistral, or other models locally for complete privacy and zero API costs

12. **Bypass MCP Token Limits** - Automatically works around MCP's 25K limit for large prompts and responses

**The Killer Feature:** When Claude's context resets, just ask to "continue with O3" - the other model's response magically revives Claude's understanding without re-ingesting documents!

#### Example: Multi-Model Code Review Workflow

1. `Perform a codereview using gemini pro and o3 and use planner to generate a detailed plan, implement the fixes and do a final precommit check by continuing from the previous codereview`
2. This triggers a [`codereview`](docs/tools/codereview.md) workflow where Claude walks the code, looking for all kinds of issues
3. After multiple passes, collects relevant code and makes note of issues along the way
4. Maintains a `confidence` level between `exploring`, `low`, `medium`, `high` and `certain` to track how confidently it's been able to find and identify issues
5. Generates a detailed list of critical -> low issues
6. Shares the relevant files, findings, etc with **Gemini Pro** to perform a deep dive for a second [`codereview`](docs/tools/codereview.md)
7. Comes back with a response and next does the same with o3, adding to the prompt if a new discovery comes to light
8. When done, Claude takes in all the feedback and combines a single list of all critical -> low issues, including good patterns in your code. The final list includes new findings or revisions in case Claude misunderstood or missed something crucial and one of the other models pointed this out
9. It then uses the [`planner`](docs/tools/planner.md) workflow to break the work down into simpler steps if a major refactor is required
10. Claude then performs the actual work of fixing highlighted issues
11. When done, Claude returns to Gemini Pro for a [`precommit`](docs/tools/precommit.md) review

All within a single conversation thread! Gemini Pro in step 11 _knows_ what was recommended by O3 in step 7! Taking that context
and review into consideration to aid with its final pre-commit review.

**Think of it as Claude Code _for_ Claude Code.** This MCP isn't magic. It's just **super-glue**.

> **Remember:** Claude stays in full control — but **YOU** call the shots.
> Zen is designed to have Claude engage other models only when needed — and to follow through with meaningful back-and-forth.
> **You're** the one who crafts the powerful prompt that makes Claude bring in Gemini, Flash, O3 — or fly solo.
> You're the guide. The prompter. The puppeteer.
> #### You are the AI - **Actually Intelligent**.

#### Recommended AI Stack

For best results, use Claude Code with:
- **Opus 4.1** - All agentic work and orchestration
- **Gemini 2.5 Pro** - Deep thinking, code reviews, debugging, pre-commit analysis

</details>

## Quick Start (5 minutes)

**Prerequisites:** Python 3.10+, Git, [uv installed](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/)

**1. Get API Keys** (choose one or more):
- **[OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/)** - Access multiple models with one API
- **[Gemini](https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey)** - Google's latest models
- **[OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys)** - O3, GPT-5 series. **Alternative**: Enable `OPENAI_CHATGPT_LOGIN_MODE=true` to use your existing ChatGPT Pro subscription tokens instead of an API key
- **[X.AI](https://console.x.ai/)** - Grok models
- **[DIAL](https://dialx.ai/)** - Vendor-agnostic model access
- **[Ollama](https://ollama.ai/)** - Local models (free)

**2. Install** (choose one):

**Option A: Instant Setup with uvx** (recommended)
```json
// Add to ~/.claude/settings.json or .mcp.json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "zen": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": ["--from", "git+https://github.com/BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server.git", "zen-mcp-server"],
      "env": {
        "PATH": "/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/opt/homebrew/bin:~/.local/bin",
        "GEMINI_API_KEY": "your-key-here"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Option B: Clone and Setup**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server.git
cd zen-mcp-server
./run-server.sh  # Handles everything: setup, config, API keys
```

**3. Start Using!**
```
"Use zen to analyze this code for security issues with gemini pro"
"Debug this error with o3 and then get flash to suggest optimizations"
"Plan the migration strategy with zen, get consensus from multiple models"
```

👉 **[Complete Setup Guide](docs/getting-started.md)** with detailed installation, configuration, and troubleshooting

## Core Tools

**Collaboration & Planning**
- **[`chat`](docs/tools/chat.md)** - Brainstorm ideas, get second opinions, validate approaches
- **[`thinkdeep`](docs/tools/thinkdeep.md)** - Extended reasoning, edge case analysis, alternative perspectives
- **[`planner`](docs/tools/planner.md)** - Break down complex projects into structured, actionable plans
- **[`consensus`](docs/tools/consensus.md)** - Get expert opinions from multiple AI models with stance steering

**Code Analysis & Quality**
- **[`analyze`](docs/tools/analyze.md)** - Understand architecture, patterns, dependencies across entire codebases
- **[`codereview`](docs/tools/codereview.md)** - Professional reviews with severity levels and actionable feedback
- **[`debug`](docs/tools/debug.md)** - Systematic investigation and root cause analysis
- **[`precommit`](docs/tools/precommit.md)** - Validate changes before committing, prevent regressions

**Development Tools**
- **[`refactor`](docs/tools/refactor.md)** - Intelligent code refactoring with decomposition focus
- **[`testgen`](docs/tools/testgen.md)** - Comprehensive test generation with edge cases
- **[`secaudit`](docs/tools/secaudit.md)** - Security audits with OWASP Top 10 analysis
- **[`docgen`](docs/tools/docgen.md)** - Generate documentation with complexity analysis

**Utilities**
- **[`challenge`](docs/tools/challenge.md)** - Prevent "You're absolutely right!" responses with critical analysis
- **[`tracer`](docs/tools/tracer.md)** - Static analysis prompts for call-flow mapping

👉 **[Complete Tools Reference](docs/tools/)** with examples, parameters, and workflows

## Key Features

**AI Orchestration**
- **Auto model selection** - Claude picks the right AI for each task
- **Multi-model workflows** - Chain different models in single conversations
- **Conversation continuity** - Context preserved across tools and models
- **[Context revival](docs/context-revival.md)** - Continue conversations even after context resets

**Model Support**
- **Multiple providers** - Gemini, OpenAI, X.AI, OpenRouter, DIAL, Ollama
- **Latest models** - GPT-5, Gemini 2.5 Pro, O3, Grok-4, local Llama
- **[Thinking modes](docs/advanced-usage.md#thinking-modes)** - Control reasoning depth vs cost
- **Vision support** - Analyze images, diagrams, screenshots

**Developer Experience**
- **Guided workflows** - Systematic investigation prevents rushed analysis
- **Smart file handling** - Auto-expand directories, manage token limits
- **Web search integration** - Access current documentation and best practices
- **[Large prompt support](docs/advanced-usage.md#working-with-large-prompts)** - Bypass MCP's 25K token limit

## Example Workflows

**Multi-model Code Review:**
```
"Perform a codereview using gemini pro and o3, then use planner to create a fix strategy"
```
→ Claude reviews code systematically → Consults Gemini Pro → Gets O3's perspective → Creates unified action plan

**Collaborative Debugging:**
```
"Debug this race condition with max thinking mode, then validate the fix with precommit"
```
→ Deep investigation → Expert analysis → Solution implementation → Pre-commit validation

**Architecture Planning:**
```
"Plan our microservices migration, get consensus from pro and o3 on the approach"
```
→ Structured planning → Multiple expert opinions → Consensus building → Implementation roadmap

👉 **[Advanced Usage Guide](docs/advanced-usage.md)** for complex workflows, model configuration, and power-user features

## Quick Links

**📖 Documentation**
- [Getting Started](docs/getting-started.md) - Complete setup guide
- [Tools Reference](docs/tools/) - All tools with examples
- [Advanced Usage](docs/advanced-usage.md) - Power user features
- [Configuration](docs/configuration.md) - Environment variables, restrictions

**🔧 Setup & Support**
- [WSL Setup](docs/wsl-setup.md) - Windows users
- [Troubleshooting](docs/troubleshooting.md) - Common issues
- [Contributing](docs/contributions.md) - Code standards, PR process

## License

Apache 2.0 License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

Built with the power of **Multi-Model AI** collaboration 🤝
- **A**ctual **I**ntelligence by real Humans
- [MCP (Model Context Protocol)](https://modelcontextprotocol.com) by Anthropic
- [Claude Code](https://claude.ai/code) - Your AI coding orchestrator
- [Gemini 2.5 Pro & Flash](https://ai.google.dev/) - Extended thinking & fast analysis
- [OpenAI O3 & GPT-5](https://openai.com/) - Strong reasoning & latest capabilities

### Star History

[![Star History Chart](https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server&type=Date)](https://www.star-history.com/#BeehiveInnovations/zen-mcp-server&Date)
