docs/tools/clink.md, before:

# Clink Tool - CLI-to-CLI Bridge

**Spawn AI subagents, connect external CLIs, orchestrate isolated contexts – all without leaving your session**

The `clink` tool transforms your CLI into a multi-agent orchestrator. Launch isolated Codex instances from _within_ Codex, delegate to Gemini's 1M context, or run specialized Claude agents—all while preserving conversation continuity. Instead of context-switching or token bloat, spawn fresh subagents that handle complex tasks in isolation and return only the results you need.

> **CAUTION**: Clink launches real CLI agents with relaxed permission flags (Gemini ships with `--yolo`, Codex with `--dangerously-bypass-approvals-and-sandbox`, Claude with `--permission-mode acceptEdits`) so they can edit files and run tools autonomously via MCP. If that’s more access than you want, remove those flags—the CLI can still open/read files and report findings, it just won’t auto-apply edits. You can also tighten role prompts or system prompts with stop-words/guardrails, or disable clink entirely. Otherwise, keep the shipped presets confined to workspaces you fully trust.

## Why Use Clink (CLI + Link)?

### Codex-within-Codex: The Ultimate Context Management

**The Problem**: You're deep in a Codex session debugging authentication. Now you need a comprehensive security audit, but that'll consume 50K tokens of context you can't spare.

**The Solution**: Spawn a fresh Codex subagent in an isolated context:
```bash
clink with codex codereviewer to audit auth/ for OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities
```

The subagent:
- Launches in a **pristine context** with full token budget
- Performs deep analysis using its own MCP tools and web search
- Returns **only the final security report** (not intermediate steps)
- Your main session stays **laser-focused** on debugging

**Works with any supported CLI**: Codex can spawn Codex / Claude Code / Gemini CLI subagents, or mix and match between different CLIs.

---

### Cross-CLI Orchestration

**Scenario 1**: You're in Codex and need Gemini's 1M context window to analyze a massive legacy codebase.

**Without clink**: Open new terminal → run `gemini` → lose conversation context → manually copy/paste findings → context mismatch hell.

**With clink**: `"clink with gemini to map dependencies across this 500-file monorepo"` – Gemini processes, returns insights, conversation flows seamlessly.

**Scenario 2**: Use [`consensus`](consensus.md) to debate features with multiple models, then hand off to Gemini for implementation.

```
"Use consensus with pro and gpt5 to decide whether to add dark mode or offline support next"
[consensus runs, models deliberate, recommendation emerges]

Use continuation with clink - implement the recommended feature
```

Gemini receives the full conversation context from `consensus` including the consensus prompt + replies, understands the chosen feature, technical constraints discussed, and can start implementation immediately. No re-explaining, no context loss - true conversation continuity across tools and models.

## Key Features

- **Stay in one CLI**: No switching between terminal sessions or losing context
- **Full conversation continuity**: Gemini's responses participate in the same conversation thread
- **Role-based prompts**: Pre-configured roles for planning, code review, or general questions
- **Full CLI capabilities**: Gemini can use its own web search, file tools, and latest features
- **Token efficiency**: File references (not full content) to conserve tokens
- **Cross-tool collaboration**: Combine with other Zen tools like `planner` → `clink` → `codereview`
- **Free tier available**: Gemini offers 1,000 requests/day free with a personal Google account - great for cost savings across tools

## Available Roles

**Default Role** - General questions, summaries, quick answers
```
Use clink to ask gemini about the latest React 19 features
```

**Planner Role** - Strategic planning with multi-phase approach
```
clink with gemini with planner role to map out our microservices migration strategy
```

**Code Reviewer Role** - Focused code analysis with severity levels
```
Use clink codereviewer role to review auth.py for security issues
```

You can make your own custom roles in `conf/cli_clients/` or tweak any of the shipped presets.

## Tool Parameters

- `prompt`: Your question or task for the external CLI (required)
- `cli_name`: Which CLI to use - `gemini` (default), `claude`, `codex`, or add your own in `conf/cli_clients/`
- `role`: Preset role - `default`, `planner`, `codereviewer` (default: `default`)
- `files`: Optional file paths for context (references only, CLI opens files itself)
- `images`: Optional image paths for visual context
- `continuation_id`: Continue previous clink conversations

## Usage Examples

**Architecture Planning:**
```
Use clink with gemini planner to design a 3-phase rollout plan for our feature flags system
```

**Code Review with Context:**
```
clink to gemini codereviewer: Review payment_service.py for race conditions and concurrency issues
```

**Codex Code Review:**
```
"clink with codex cli and perform a full code review using the codereview role"
```

**Quick Research Question:**
```
"Ask gemini via clink: What are the breaking changes in TypeScript 5.5?"
```

**Multi-Tool Workflow:**
```
"Use planner to outline the refactor, then clink gemini planner for validation,
then codereview to verify the implementation"
```

**Leveraging Gemini's Web Search:**
```
"Clink gemini to research current best practices for Kubernetes autoscaling in 2025"
```

## How Clink Works

1. **Your request** - You ask your current CLI to use `clink` with a specific CLI and role
2. **Background execution** - Zen spawns the configured CLI (e.g., `gemini --output-format json`)
3. **Context forwarding** - Your prompt, files (as references), and conversation history are sent as part of the prompt
4. **CLI processing** - Gemini (or other CLI) uses its own tools: web search, file access, thinking modes
5. **Seamless return** - Results flow back into your conversation with full context preserved
6. **Continuation support** - Future tools and models can reference Gemini's findings via [continuation support](../context-revival.md) within Zen. 

## Best Practices

- **Pre-authenticate CLIs**: Install and configure Gemini CLI first (`npm install -g @google/gemini-cli`)
- **Choose appropriate roles**: Use `planner` for strategy, `codereviewer` for code, `default` for general questions
- **Leverage CLI strengths**: Gemini's 1M context for large codebases, web search for current docs
- **Combine with Zen tools**: Chain `clink` with `planner`, `codereview`, `debug` for powerful workflows
- **File efficiency**: Pass file paths, let the CLI decide what to read (saves tokens)

## Configuration

Clink configurations live in `conf/cli_clients/`. We ship presets for the supported CLIs:

- `gemini.json` – runs `gemini --telemetry false --yolo -o json`
- `claude.json` – runs `claude --print --output-format json --permission-mode acceptEdits --model sonnet`
- `codex.json` – runs `codex exec --json --dangerously-bypass-approvals-and-sandbox`

> **CAUTION**: These flags intentionally bypass each CLI's safety prompts so they can edit files or launch tools autonomously via MCP. Only enable them in trusted sandboxes and tailor role prompts or CLI configs if you need more guardrails.

Each preset points to role-specific prompts in `systemprompts/clink/`. Duplicate those files to add more roles or adjust CLI flags.

> **Why `--yolo` for Gemini?** The Gemini CLI currently requires automatic approvals to execute its own tools (for example `run_shell_command`). Without the flag it errors with `Tool "run_shell_command" not found in registry`. See [issue #5382](https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli/issues/5382) for more details.

**Adding new CLIs**: Drop a JSON config into `conf/cli_clients/`, create role prompts in `systemprompts/clink/`, and register a parser/agent if the CLI outputs a new format.

## When to Use Clink vs Other Tools

- **Use `clink`** for: Leveraging external CLI capabilities (Gemini's web search, 1M context), specialized CLI features, cross-CLI collaboration
- **Use `chat`** for: Direct model-to-model conversations within Zen
- **Use `planner`** for: Zen's native planning workflows with step validation
- **Use `codereview`** for: Zen's structured code review with severity levels

## Setup Requirements

Ensure the relevant CLI is installed and configured:

- [Claude Code](https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code)
- [Gemini CLI](https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli)
- [Codex CLI](https://docs.sourcegraph.com/codex)

## Related Guides

- [Chat Tool](chat.md) - Direct model conversations
- [Planner Tool](planner.md) - Zen's native planning workflows
- [CodeReview Tool](codereview.md) - Structured code reviews
- [Context Revival](../context-revival.md) - Continuing conversations across tools
- [Advanced Usage](../advanced-usage.md) - Complex multi-tool workflows

Commit message:

feat: Add code generator role to CLink
- Add new 'codegen' role for structured code generation via CLink
- Create systemprompts/clink/default_codegen.txt with CLI-optimized prompting
- Update all CLI client configs (gemini, claude, codex) with codegen role
- Add comprehensive documentation in docs/tools/clink.md with usage examples
- Add 2 new tests: test_codegen_role_available and test_clink_codegen_role_structured_output

The codegen role uses structured XML-like tags for automated code extraction:
- <NEWFILE: path> for new files
- <UPDATED_EXISTING_FILE: path> for modifications
- Includes step-by-step instructions for CLI workflows
- Requires <SUMMARY> conclusion for consistency with other roles

All tests passing (7/7 in test_clink_tool.py)

docs/tools/clink.md, after:

# Clink Tool - CLI-to-CLI Bridge

**Spawn AI subagents, connect external CLIs, orchestrate isolated contexts – all without leaving your session**

The `clink` tool transforms your CLI into a multi-agent orchestrator. Launch isolated Codex instances from _within_ Codex, delegate to Gemini's 1M context, or run specialized Claude agents—all while preserving conversation continuity. Instead of context-switching or token bloat, spawn fresh subagents that handle complex tasks in isolation and return only the results you need.

> **CAUTION**: Clink launches real CLI agents with relaxed permission flags (Gemini ships with `--yolo`, Codex with `--dangerously-bypass-approvals-and-sandbox`, Claude with `--permission-mode acceptEdits`) so they can edit files and run tools autonomously via MCP. If that’s more access than you want, remove those flags—the CLI can still open/read files and report findings, it just won’t auto-apply edits. You can also tighten role prompts or system prompts with stop-words/guardrails, or disable clink entirely. Otherwise, keep the shipped presets confined to workspaces you fully trust.

## Why Use Clink (CLI + Link)?

### Codex-within-Codex: The Ultimate Context Management

**The Problem**: You're deep in a Codex session debugging authentication. Now you need a comprehensive security audit, but that'll consume 50K tokens of context you can't spare.

**The Solution**: Spawn a fresh Codex subagent in an isolated context:
```bash
clink with codex codereviewer to audit auth/ for OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities
```

The subagent:
- Launches in a **pristine context** with full token budget
- Performs deep analysis using its own MCP tools and web search
- Returns **only the final security report** (not intermediate steps)
- Your main session stays **laser-focused** on debugging

**Works with any supported CLI**: Codex can spawn Codex / Claude Code / Gemini CLI subagents, or mix and match between different CLIs.

---

### Cross-CLI Orchestration

**Scenario 1**: You're in Codex and need Gemini's 1M context window to analyze a massive legacy codebase.

**Without clink**: Open new terminal → run `gemini` → lose conversation context → manually copy/paste findings → context mismatch hell.

**With clink**: `"clink with gemini to map dependencies across this 500-file monorepo"` – Gemini processes, returns insights, conversation flows seamlessly.

**Scenario 2**: Use [`consensus`](consensus.md) to debate features with multiple models, then hand off to Gemini for implementation.

```
"Use consensus with pro and gpt5 to decide whether to add dark mode or offline support next"
[consensus runs, models deliberate, recommendation emerges]

Use continuation with clink - implement the recommended feature
```

Gemini receives the full conversation context from `consensus` including the consensus prompt + replies, understands the chosen feature, technical constraints discussed, and can start implementation immediately. No re-explaining, no context loss - true conversation continuity across tools and models.

## Key Features

- **Stay in one CLI**: No switching between terminal sessions or losing context
- **Full conversation continuity**: Gemini's responses participate in the same conversation thread
- **Role-based prompts**: Pre-configured roles for planning, code review, or general questions
- **Full CLI capabilities**: Gemini can use its own web search, file tools, and latest features
- **Token efficiency**: File references (not full content) to conserve tokens
- **Cross-tool collaboration**: Combine with other Zen tools like `planner` → `clink` → `codereview`
- **Free tier available**: Gemini offers 1,000 requests/day free with a personal Google account - great for cost savings across tools

## Available Roles

**Default Role** - General questions, summaries, quick answers
```
Use clink to ask gemini about the latest React 19 features
```

**Planner Role** - Strategic planning with multi-phase approach
```
clink with gemini with planner role to map out our microservices migration strategy
```

**Code Reviewer Role** - Focused code analysis with severity levels
```
Use clink codereviewer role to review auth.py for security issues
```

**Code Generator Role** - Structured code generation for substantial implementations
```
clink with gemini codegen to create a REST API module with authentication and CRUD operations
```

The `codegen` role outputs complete, working code using a structured format with `<GENERATED-CODE>` tags, making it ideal for:
- Creating new features from scratch with multiple files
- Major refactoring across large sections of code
- Implementing new modules, components, or subsystems
- Large-scale updates affecting substantial portions of the codebase

Generated code includes step-by-step instructions, complete implementations (no placeholders), and a summary conclusion with testing recommendations.

You can make your own custom roles in `conf/cli_clients/` or tweak any of the shipped presets.

## Tool Parameters

- `prompt`: Your question or task for the external CLI (required)
- `cli_name`: Which CLI to use - `gemini` (default), `claude`, `codex`, or add your own in `conf/cli_clients/`
- `role`: Preset role - `default`, `planner`, `codereviewer`, `codegen` (default: `default`)
- `files`: Optional file paths for context (references only, CLI opens files itself)
- `images`: Optional image paths for visual context
- `continuation_id`: Continue previous clink conversations

## Usage Examples

**Architecture Planning:**
```
Use clink with gemini planner to design a 3-phase rollout plan for our feature flags system
```

**Code Review with Context:**
```
clink to gemini codereviewer: Review payment_service.py for race conditions and concurrency issues
```

**Codex Code Review:**
```
"clink with codex cli and perform a full code review using the codereview role"
```

**Code Generation with Gemini:**
```
clink with gemini codegen to implement a user authentication module with JWT tokens, password hashing, and session management
```

**Complex Feature Implementation:**
```
"Use clink with codegen role to create a complete payment processing system with Stripe integration, webhook handling, and transaction logging"
```

**Major Refactoring:**
```
clink codegen with claude to refactor the database layer from SQLAlchemy to async SQLModel with proper migrations
```

**Quick Research Question:**
```
"Ask gemini via clink: What are the breaking changes in TypeScript 5.5?"
```

**Multi-Tool Workflow:**
```
"Use planner to outline the refactor, then clink gemini planner for validation,
then codereview to verify the implementation"
```

**Leveraging Gemini's Web Search:**
```
"Clink gemini to research current best practices for Kubernetes autoscaling in 2025"
```

## How Clink Works

1. **Your request** - You ask your current CLI to use `clink` with a specific CLI and role
2. **Background execution** - Zen spawns the configured CLI (e.g., `gemini --output-format json`)
3. **Context forwarding** - Your prompt, files (as references), and conversation history are sent as part of the prompt
4. **CLI processing** - Gemini (or other CLI) uses its own tools: web search, file access, thinking modes
5. **Seamless return** - Results flow back into your conversation with full context preserved
6. **Continuation support** - Future tools and models can reference Gemini's findings via [continuation support](../context-revival.md) within Zen. 

## Best Practices

- **Pre-authenticate CLIs**: Install and configure Gemini CLI first (`npm install -g @google/gemini-cli`)
- **Choose appropriate roles**: Use `planner` for strategy, `codereviewer` for code, `default` for general questions
- **Leverage CLI strengths**: Gemini's 1M context for large codebases, web search for current docs
- **Combine with Zen tools**: Chain `clink` with `planner`, `codereview`, `debug` for powerful workflows
- **File efficiency**: Pass file paths, let the CLI decide what to read (saves tokens)

## Configuration

Clink configurations live in `conf/cli_clients/`. We ship presets for the supported CLIs:

- `gemini.json` – runs `gemini --telemetry false --yolo -o json`
- `claude.json` – runs `claude --print --output-format json --permission-mode acceptEdits --model sonnet`
- `codex.json` – runs `codex exec --json --dangerously-bypass-approvals-and-sandbox`

> **CAUTION**: These flags intentionally bypass each CLI's safety prompts so they can edit files or launch tools autonomously via MCP. Only enable them in trusted sandboxes and tailor role prompts or CLI configs if you need more guardrails.

Each preset points to role-specific prompts in `systemprompts/clink/`. Duplicate those files to add more roles or adjust CLI flags.

> **Why `--yolo` for Gemini?** The Gemini CLI currently requires automatic approvals to execute its own tools (for example `run_shell_command`). Without the flag it errors with `Tool "run_shell_command" not found in registry`. See [issue #5382](https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli/issues/5382) for more details.

**Adding new CLIs**: Drop a JSON config into `conf/cli_clients/`, create role prompts in `systemprompts/clink/`, and register a parser/agent if the CLI outputs a new format.

## When to Use Clink vs Other Tools

- **Use `clink`** for: Leveraging external CLI capabilities (Gemini's web search, 1M context), specialized CLI features, cross-CLI collaboration
- **Use `chat`** for: Direct model-to-model conversations within Zen
- **Use `planner`** for: Zen's native planning workflows with step validation
- **Use `codereview`** for: Zen's structured code review with severity levels

## Setup Requirements

Ensure the relevant CLI is installed and configured:

- [Claude Code](https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code)
- [Gemini CLI](https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli)
- [Codex CLI](https://docs.sourcegraph.com/codex)

## Related Guides

- [Chat Tool](chat.md) - Direct model conversations
- [Planner Tool](planner.md) - Zen's native planning workflows
- [CodeReview Tool](codereview.md) - Structured code reviews
- [Context Revival](../context-revival.md) - Continuing conversations across tools
- [Advanced Usage](../advanced-usage.md) - Complex multi-tool workflows
